# Semi-log graph paper for stock charts

This is a printable semi-log graph paper template
for charting market prices and volumes by hand.
The design was inspired by
Helene Meisler's [hand-drawn stock market charts][charts].

The template should to be printed onto
US letter size paper in a portrait orientation,
ideally using a 600 dpi laser printer,
but can be adapted for other configurations.

## Specifications

The horizontal axis is linear. The major grid has 26 steps,
each corresponding to one week in a typical stock chart.
The minor grid further subdivides each major grid step into 6 steps;
the 5 intervening lines can be used for
each of the 5 trading days in a given week.

The vertical axis is logarithmic. This means that a fixed distance,
anywhere on the chart, will correspond to the same *multiple*
no matter its vertical position.
For example,
the distance between 20 and 25 and
the distance between 64 and 80
will be the same (approximately 3.5cm in this case).
It corresponds to a 25% increase (or 20% decrease).
When coordinates are multiplied by a constant,
the entire chart is shifted but not scaled.

The distance from the bottom to the middle of the chart
corresponds to a factor of 2 (a 100% increase or 50% decrease).
The distance from the middle to the top is the same,
and the corresponding coordinate values are again multiplied by two.
The major grid divides each of these two sections into ten.
The two halves are identical copies of the same grid,
but a major step in the upper section corresponds to twice the increase
in coordinate values compared with a major step in the lower section.
Each major step is further subdivided into 4 steps of the minor grid.

The lower chart at the bottom of the page
uses a simple linear grid and is typically used to plot volume.

## Setting up a scale

The (faint) labels on the left-hand side,
which run from 20 at the bottom to 40 in the middle to 80 at the top,
can be helpful when choosing a scale. To set up your scale,
choose a factor that will place the chart in a convenient position.

For example, as of 2022-08-30, the S&P 500 sits at 3,986.
Plotting it with a factor of 1/100
will start the chart roughly in the middle (at 39.86),
with major steps in the lower half representing 100 points
and major steps in the upper half representing 200 points.

On the other hand, today's last sale of a share of Apple Inc. (AAPL)
was priced at $158.91.
A factor of 1 (at 158.91) or 1/10 (at 15.89) falls outside the chart,
but you may want to plot it with a factor of 2/10 (at 31.78),
or perhaps 4/10 (at 63.56) if you are bearish.
The curve will appear the same in either case,
but will land in either the lower of upper section,
with a major grid step corresponding to a $5 change in the price 
in both cases.

## LaTeX source code and variations

The template is generated using the LaTeX package [`pgfplots`][pgfplots].
For convenience I include both the source code (`hmgp.tex`)
and generated PDF file (`hmgp.pdf`) in this repository.

If you know how to use LaTeX, it should be fairly straightforward
to tweak the parameters to generate graph paper templates for
different paper sizes and orientations, scales, etc.
If you have a particular request, please feel free to use
the GitHub issue tracker and I may include ready-to-use versions
of popular variations.

## Acknowledgments

[Helene Meisler][hm] is a veteran trader and technical analyst
who got started before computerized stock charts were common.
When those became more widely available, she found that
charting by hand nevertheless gave her a better handle of
the market's conditions, as she explains in her fascinating
*Odd Lots* [interview][oddlots] with [Tracy Alloway][ta] and
[Joe Weisenthal][jw].

Meisler maintains a Twitter account where she regularly posts
photographs of her hand-written charts.
According to her, the graph paper she uses
[stopped being manufactured][gpout] in 1989,
so I reversed-engineered the layout from her photographs
and adapted it to use on US letter-sized paper
for all of you analog nerds out there.

I am grateful to Meisler, Halloway and Weisenthal 
for their great interview which led me down that path.

-- Jérémie Koenig, 2022-08-31

[charts]: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-08-24/seven-hand-drawn-helene-meisler-charts-that-explain-the-stock-market-right-now
[oddlots]: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-08-25/helene-meisler-on-what-s-going-on-with-the-stock-market-now
[pgfplots]: https://ctan.org/pkg/pgfplots
[gpout]: https://twitter.com/hmeisler/status/1562917005836947456
[hm]: https://twitter.com/hmeisler
[ta]: https://twitter.com/tracyalloway
[jw]: https://twitter.com/TheStalwart
